models/20180405-EMPlaces-data-model-notes.md, before:

# EMPlaces data model notes

@@NOTES:
- reorganize titles of annotation diagrams


## Shapes

- large round-ended shapes designate classes, or entitity types, which in actual place descriptions appear as instances of the described class.  The underlying rectangles to the upper left of the main class symbol indicate URIs or CURIEs (compact URIs) for one or more classes of which the designated value is a member.

- large rectangular shapes designate literal values, which in actual place descriptions appear as strings, numbers or other literal data values.

- @@TODO: add "instance" shape

## Relationships (properties, connections)

- single-headed arrows are used to indicate a one-to-one relationship between the subject ("from") and the object ("to") entities.  E.g., a place has a single preferred name.

- double-headed arrows are used to indicate a one-to-many relationship between subject and object.  E.g., a place may have multiple alternative names.

- labels on arrows identify a relationship between subjects and objects.  They indicate the URI of the property that connects a subject to an object when represented as linked data.

## Colours

Colour is used in the diagrams to give a sense of the role and/or source of information in EMPlaces descriptions:

-   Yellow indicates "core data" which is derived from a reference gazetteer.  The "Reference gazeteer entry", which is indicated by property "em:coreDataRef" whose subject is the Place concerned.  The general intent is that core data will be present for all place descriptions.

    A key property of this core data is that it may be automatically updated if the reference gazeteer entry is updated; as such it should not normally be edited ("messed with") in EMPlaces cataloguing workflows.  (In the case of a historical place that does not exist in the reference gazetteer, this core data will need to be created manually.)

    @@TODO: if data displayed as core requires intervention to construct, how will this be recoirded so that upodates to the reference gazetteer can be applied automatically.

-   Orange indicates EMPlaces additional data about a place that (generally) if not provided by a conventional gazetteer.  This data represents editorial contributions of EMPlaces to the information about a place.  The intent is that EMPlaces additional data will be provided where available, and is not necessarily poresent for every Place instance.

    @@TODO: indicate a simple generic mechanism that distinguishes core data instances from added data, so that they can be reliably superseded when gazetteer-provided informaton is refreshed.  Possibilities ofr this include: flag associated with value; type associated with core value; subtypes for core values; separate properties for core values; subproperties for core values; etc.

-   Green is used for spatial location information.

-   Blue/lilac is used for temporal information.

Some entities are shown with both yellow and orange colouring.  This indicates that the corresponding entity types may be used to represent either core data or additional data about a place.


# Classes

## Place (`em:Place`)

This class represents the central idea described by EMPlaces.  Instances of this class represent a place, in the sense used by Pleiades: "constructed by human experience".

See also:
- https://pleiades.stoa.org/help/conceptual-overview
- https://pleiades.stoa.org/help/pleiades-data-model/
- 


## Place type (_term TBD_)

A value that indicates a type of a place (e.g. city,  battlefield, country, etc.).  For core data populated from GeoNames, these would be GeoName feature class codes (A, ADM1, ADM2, etc.).  A place may (and generally does) have more than one type.

(We suggest that values used are based on Getty AAT terms)

## Place category (_term TBD_)

Place types may be associated with categories (e.g. administrative, ecclesiastical, etc.)  These associations with categories are initially intended to describe groupings of place types that are associated with various hierarchies.  But the notion is quite general, and other uses may emerge over time (e.g. a "geographical feature" category might cover mountains, lakes, rivers, seas, islands, etc., for which there is no specific hierarchy).

A current place must have a type in the adminsitrative category.

Initial category values will be:

- Administrative
- Ecclesiastical
- Military
- Judicial


## Reference gazetteer entry

A node that references a gazetteer entry and also provides a label for that entry.

## Preferred name

A string that is the preferred name for a place; this is the default name used when referring to that place.

## Alternate name

A string, possibly with a language code, that is an alernative name for a place.  Alternative names are generally alternative transliterations and language representations for the name of the place.

## @@TODO: technical metadata

Supplied by underlying systtem, covers:
- creator
- contributors
- licenses (core, EMplaces)


## Description

A description of a place.

The description may be initially populated from the reference gazeteer entry, but is editorialy controlled by EMPlaces.  Its focus is on the historical existence and context of the place, and may diverge from the gazetteer description.  As such, it is not intended to be updated when the other core data obtained from the reference gazetteer entry is refreshed.

## Qualified relation

@@TODO: note current hierarchy is core; historical is additional@@

A Qualified relation represents a historical relationship between two places.  Specifically, the relationship is one that exists only for a limited perod of time (e.g. the City of Opole being administratively part of the Duchy of Opole during the period 1281 to 1521).

Thus, in addition to being linked to the two related places, a Qualified relation is also linked to a Timespan during which the relationship existed, and a Relation type that indicates the type of relationship (e.g. administrative part, ecclesiastic part, etc.)

The primary intent of these Qualified relations is to represent multiple time-varying hierarchical relationships between places.  But the mechanism here is quire general, and other uses, not necessarily hierarchical in nature, could be adopted in due course (e.g. treaties, communication links).

See also: Relation type, Place type and Place category.

## Relation type

A Relation type is a value associated with a Qualified relation to indicate the type of relation (e.g. administrative part, ecclesiastic part, etc.).  It also indicates the types of places between which the relation may hold (e.g. an administrative part relationship may hold between empires, countries, administrative regions, cities, etc.).

A Relation type is part of the general structure for representing relationships, and is generally not linked to any particular places.

Future usage could associate structural constraints on Relation types (e.g. that they are hierarchical in nature), but this is not covered in the present proposal.

See also: Qualified relation, Place type and Place catagory.

## Place type

A value that represents a type of place (e.g. city, battlefield, empire, etc.)

See also: Relation type and Place category.

## Place category

See also: Relation type and Place type.

A value that reprents a category of places, or a set of place types (e.g. administrative, ecclesiastical, military, geographical, etc.).

A place type may belong to several cvatagories.

The intent of this value is to provide a means to identifty the various place types that may appear in a given hierarchy:  in this use, the place categiory identifies a hierarchy.  But the mechanism provided is quite general, and could be used to identify other groupings of place types (e.g. habitations).

@@TODO: model Place categories as RDF classes, whose members are Place type values?

## Setting

@@TODO: note concept derived from Grossner's Topotime work@@

Represents a bounded region in space and time (cf. CIDOC CRM [E92 Spacetime Volume](http://www.cidoc-crm.org/lrmoo/entity/e92-spacetime-volume/version-6.2))

## Bibliographic entry

A bibliographic entry (preferably structured) to some published work.

@@TODO: adopt bibliographic structure; e.g. bibtex-json derived.

@@TODO: can we get away with a minimal text format in V1?  Or a very reduced structured format?

## Source

A reference to a source of a claim made by an Annotation.  May also convey contextual information about the applicability of the claim.

@@applied to name attestations:  label, language, link to /something/

@@move down to annotations section

## Related resource

A reference to a resource that is believed to contain relevant additional information about a place (or other entity).

@@TODO: use with `rdfs:seeAlso` instead of `em:relatedesource`?

## Timespan

Represents a period of time.

May be with reference to a specific calendar dates, or more generally to some identified but maybe unspecified period (cf. PeriodO).

## Location

Provides information about the physical location of a Place.

@@@@ rework: atial location specified or reference to locatiopns @@@@  May be connected to specific geographic or spatial location, or simply a reference to some unspecified location.

@@TODO: try to be clear about the distinction between Place (as "constructed by human experience") and Location.

@@TODO: refer to existing work.  Intend to not invent here.  (e.g. Topotime, Pleiades)


# Annotations general model

@@@describe general approach; per-annotation details come later

@@TODO: reference standard!!!!

## Annotations general structure

## `em:hasAnnotation` Annotation 

This statement indicates an annotation associated with a place.  The annotation may carry different information about the place, dependent on the value of the associated Annotation type.

`em:hasAnnotation` functions roughly as an inverse of `oa:hastarget`, and is defined to simplify JSON-LD representations of annotations associated with a place.  The annotation itself should also have an `oa:hasTarget` property with the asscoated place as its object, to be a valid web annoation.

@@TODO: would it be better to associate an anotation container with the place (e.g. using `em:hasAnnotations`), or to treat the place itself as an annotation container?  Or maybe have a separate annotation container for all places?  Probably not: it just complicates things for no clear value.  It may make sense to have a separate annotation container for all place annotations, but that can be real;ized later if desired.

### `oa:hasTarget` Place

Connection from an annotation back to the associated place.

See also `em:hasAnnotation` Annotation.

### `oa:motivatedBy` Annotation type

The purpose of the annotation type is to make it easy to find particiular annotation values associated with a place.

@@TODO: is this the appropriate property?  Maybe `oa:purpose` (doesn't seem quite right), some new property, or an additional `rdf:type associated` with the annotation body?

@@TODO: instead of `oa:motivatedBy`, use `rdf:type`.  Hence annotation types arethemselves `rdfs:Class`es

### `oa:hasBody` Annotation body

The Annotation body conveys specific information associated with the associated place.  The structure of this information is definbed by the corresponding Annotation type value.

@@TODO: should the annotation body also reference the place directly?  (This would make it stand more independently, maybe easier to process separately from the annotation itself, but could it also cause some semantic problems?)
-- My current preference is "no" - rather, use the annotation to stand for the qualified relation.

@@TODO: should the temporal information be attached to the annotation body, or to the annotation (as now)?
-- Currently, I prefer attachment to the Annotation, but I should check that this doesn't break anything in OA.  (Ask Rob Sanderson?)
-- Could this be considered to be a subproperty of AO "scope"?

@@TODO: should the annotation type be attached to the annotation body, or to the annotation (as now)?
-- I'm inclined to leave it on the Annotation.  But check this doesn't violate OA.

@@TODO: should the annotation carry an editorial note: currently, that is attached to the annotation body.
-- I'm inclined to move it to the Annotation.  But check this doesn't violate OA.
-- OA allows multiple bodies per annotation.  Suggest the editorialnote is provided as a separate body with textual value.

@@NOTE: AO defines a `source` property, but its use is more akin to prov:specializationOf.

@@TODO: the above questions arise in part from thinking about the "annotation" as being a reification of an association between the place and the annotation body, thereby allowing that association to be qualified in various ways.

@@TODO: the above questions also beg the question: "why annoations?".  A possible answer is that they provide a seamless way to incorporate 3rd-party data, externally stored and managed, into an overall description.  This could support a number of potential usage models for EWMPlaces and friends (researcher notebooks, 3rd party submissions for incorporaton, use-dependent trust models fopr annotation data, etc.)

## `em:when` Timespan

Temporal qualification of association described by the annotation.

@@TODO: is this OK applied to the annotation, or should it be the annotation body?

### `em:source` Source

Indicates the source of information for the claim represented by this annotation.


# Specific Annotation details

## Name attestation

@@@TODO

## Calendar in use

Annotation type: `em:CalendarInUse`

### Calendar label

A short string or phrase used as a label for the calendar; e.g., "Julian", "Gregorian", etc.

### `em:uri` Calendar resource

@@TODO: `em:uri` is probably a poor name (implies mention rather than use).  Maybe `em:resource`?  Or `rdf:value`?  Or ...?

An arbitrary resource identifying and describing the calendar.  May be content negotiated to retrieve different formats.  Ideally, content negotion can provide a linked data representation, but this may not always be possible.  At least, the URI of this resource should be a way of uniquely identifying the calendar concerned.

### `rdfs:comment` Description

A textual description of the calendar's applicability to the associated place.

NOTE: the calendar itself may be described by a textual description associated with the calendar resource.  Where the same calendar is in use at several different places and/or times, it should be described just once.

### `em:when` Timespan

Indicates a period during which the calendar was used at the associated place.


## Map reference

@@@TODO

## Canonical URI

@@@TODO

## Linkback

A linkback annotation records a reference to the associated place from some external or separate published data.  For example, if a third party has published some additional data about an EMPlaces place, it may share a reference to that additional data via a published linkback annotation.

The data model does not constrain how a linkback is published; e.g., it may be part of the EMPlaces data, or the additional data service, or via some third-party annotation store.

@@@TODO



# Properties

@@TODO?

Commit message:

Update data model diagrams, example data anmd UI crosswalk. Note that the data model diagrams are now collected into a multipage file.

models/20180405-EMPlaces-data-model-notes.md, after:

# EMPlaces data model notes

@@NOTES:
- reorganize titles of annotation diagrams


## Shapes

- large round-ended shapes designate classes, or entitity types, which in actual place descriptions appear as instances of the described class.  The underlying rectangles to the upper left of the main class symbol indicate URIs or CURIEs (compact URIs) for one or more classes of which the designated value is a member.

- large rectangular shapes designate literal values, which in actual place descriptions appear as strings, numbers or other literal data values.

- @@TODO: add "instance" shape

## Relationships (properties, connections)

- single-headed arrows are used to indicate a one-to-one relationship between the subject ("from") and the object ("to") entities.  E.g., a place has a single preferred name.

- double-headed arrows are used to indicate a one-to-many relationship between subject and object.  E.g., a place may have multiple alternative names.

- labels on arrows identify a relationship between subjects and objects.  They indicate the URI of the property that connects a subject to an object when represented as linked data.

## Colours

Colour is used in the diagrams to give a sense of the role and/or source of information in EMPlaces descriptions:

-   Yellow indicates "core data" which is derived from a reference gazetteer.  The "Reference gazeteer entry", which is indicated by property "em:coreDataRef" whose subject is the Place concerned.  The general intent is that core data will be present for all place descriptions.

    A key property of this core data is that it may be automatically updated if the reference gazeteer entry is updated; as such it should not normally be edited ("messed with") in EMPlaces cataloguing workflows.  (In the case of a historical place that does not exist in the reference gazetteer, this core data will need to be created manually.)

    @@TODO: if data displayed as core requires intervention to construct, how will this be recoirded so that upodates to the reference gazetteer can be applied automatically.

-   Orange indicates EMPlaces additional data about a place that (generally) if not provided by a conventional gazetteer.  This data represents editorial contributions of EMPlaces to the information about a place.  The intent is that EMPlaces additional data will be provided where available, and is not necessarily poresent for every Place instance.

    @@TODO: indicate a simple generic mechanism that distinguishes core data instances from added data, so that they can be reliably superseded when gazetteer-provided informaton is refreshed.  Possibilities ofr this include: flag associated with value; type associated with core value; subtypes for core values; separate properties for core values; subproperties for core values; etc.

-   Green is used for spatial location information.

-   Blue/lilac is used for temporal information.

Some entities are shown with both yellow and orange colouring.  This indicates that the corresponding entity types may be used to represent either core data or additional data about a place.


# Classes

## Place (`em:Place`)

This class represents the central idea described by EMPlaces.  Instances of this class represent a place, in the sense used by Pleiades: "constructed by human experience".

See also:
- https://pleiades.stoa.org/help/conceptual-overview
- https://pleiades.stoa.org/help/pleiades-data-model/
- 


## Place type (_term TBD_)

A value that indicates a type of a place (e.g. city,  battlefield, country, etc.).  For core data populated from GeoNames, these would be GeoName feature class codes (A, ADM1, ADM2, etc.).  A place may (and generally does) have more than one type.

(We suggest that values used are based on Getty AAT terms)

## Place category (_term TBD_)

Place types may be associated with categories (e.g. administrative, ecclesiastical, etc.)  These associations with categories are initially intended to describe groupings of place types that are associated with various hierarchies.  But the notion is quite general, and other uses may emerge over time (e.g. a "geographical feature" category might cover mountains, lakes, rivers, seas, islands, etc., for which there is no specific hierarchy).

A current place must have a type in the adminsitrative category.

Initial category values will be:

- Administrative
- Ecclesiastical
- Military
- Judicial


## Reference gazetteer entry

A node that references a gazetteer entry and also provides a label for that entry.

## Preferred name

A string that is the preferred name for a place; this is the default name used when referring to that place.

## Alternate name

A string, possibly with a language code, that is an alernative name for a place.  Alternative names are generally alternative transliterations and language representations for the name of the place.

## @@TODO: technical metadata

Supplied by underlying systtem, covers:
- creator
- contributors
- licenses (core, EMplaces)


## Description

A description of a place.

The description may be initially populated from the reference gazeteer entry, but is editorialy controlled by EMPlaces.  Its focus is on the historical existence and context of the place, and may diverge from the gazetteer description.  As such, it is not intended to be updated when the other core data obtained from the reference gazetteer entry is refreshed.

## Qualified relation

@@TODO: note current hierarchy is core; historical is additional@@

A Qualified relation represents a historical relationship between two places.  Specifically, the relationship is one that exists only for a limited perod of time (e.g. the City of Opole being administratively part of the Duchy of Opole during the period 1281 to 1521).

Thus, in addition to being linked to the two related places, a Qualified relation is also linked to a Timespan during which the relationship existed, and a Relation type that indicates the type of relationship (e.g. administrative part, ecclesiastic part, etc.)

The primary intent of these Qualified relations is to represent multiple time-varying hierarchical relationships between places.  But the mechanism here is quire general, and other uses, not necessarily hierarchical in nature, could be adopted in due course (e.g. treaties, communication links).

See also: Relation type, Place type and Place category.

## Relation type

A Relation type is a value associated with a Qualified relation to indicate the type of relation (e.g. administrative part, ecclesiastic part, etc.).  It also indicates the types of places between which the relation may hold (e.g. an administrative part relationship may hold between empires, countries, administrative regions, cities, etc.).

A Relation type is part of the general structure for representing relationships, and is generally not linked to any particular places.

Future usage could associate structural constraints on Relation types (e.g. that they are hierarchical in nature), but this is not covered in the present proposal.

See also: Qualified relation, Place type and Place catagory.

## Place type

A value that represents a type of place (e.g. city, battlefield, empire, etc.)

See also: Relation type and Place category.

## Place category

See also: Relation type and Place type.

A value that reprents a category of places, or a set of place types (e.g. administrative, ecclesiastical, military, geographical, etc.).

A place type may belong to several cvatagories.

The intent of this value is to provide a means to identifty the various place types that may appear in a given hierarchy:  in this use, the place categiory identifies a hierarchy.  But the mechanism provided is quite general, and could be used to identify other groupings of place types (e.g. habitations).

@@TODO: model Place categories as RDF classes, whose members are Place type values?

## Setting

@@TODO: note concept derived from Grossner's Topotime work@@

Represents a bounded region in space and time (cf. CIDOC CRM [E92 Spacetime Volume](http://www.cidoc-crm.org/lrmoo/entity/e92-spacetime-volume/version-6.2))

## Bibliographic entry

A bibliographic entry (preferably structured) to some published work.

@@TODO: adopt bibliographic structure; e.g. bibtex-json derived.

@@TODO: can we get away with a minimal text format in V1?  Or a very reduced structured format?

## Source

A reference to a source of a claim made by an Annotation.  May also convey contextual information about the applicability of the claim.

@@applied to name attestations:  label, language, link to /something/

@@move down to annotations section

## Related resource

A reference to a resource that is believed to contain relevant additional information about a place (or other entity).

@@TODO: use with `rdfs:seeAlso` instead of `em:relatedesource`?

## Timespan

Represents a period of time.

May be with reference to a specific calendar dates, or more generally to some identified but maybe unspecified period (cf. PeriodO).

## Location

Provides information about the physical location of a Place.

@@@@ rework: atial location specified or reference to locatiopns @@@@  May be connected to specific geographic or spatial location, or simply a reference to some unspecified location.

@@TODO: try to be clear about the distinction between Place (as "constructed by human experience") and Location.

@@TODO: refer to existing work.  Intend to not invent here.  (e.g. Topotime, Pleiades)


# Annotations general model

## Annotations general structure

Web Annotations are a W3C web standard ([data model](http://www.w3.org/TR/annotation-model/) and [vocabulary](http://www.w3.org/TR/annotation-vocab/)) for connecting some descriptive information (a "body") with a resource (the "target").

![Basic Web Annotation (from W3C specification)](images/web_annotation_basic_model.png "Basic Web Annotation (W3C)")

Traditionally, Web Annotations have been associated with human-readable annotations of documents (which are a way of associating some additional information of opinion or context with the content of a document), but the underlying model is also applicable to associating machine-readable data with an arbitrary resource identified by a URI.

Web Annotations have been adopted for use in the EMPlaces for the following reasons:

1. They allow additional information to be associated with a place, along with contextual information; e.g. a name attestation may be associated with a period within which it is believed to have been in use.  In particular, Web Annotations allow association of provenance and contributor informaton with individual claims about a place.

2. They proviode an extension point through which additional information about a place can be introduced using the same basic structures that are used for basic EMPlaces information.

3. They allow separately-published information to be associated with a place, which in turn provides a possible route for curation of third party contributions to EMPlaces while maintaining editorial integrity of the base service.

4. As an increasingly popular web standard, we anticipate that Web Annotations will be increasingly supported by a range of software systems, which should make EMPlaces data more accessible and flexible for use with independent information systems.

When reading a Web Annotation, think of the "target" as something that the annotation is about - in our case, this is commonly a place.  The "body" is then some additional information about that place (or thing).  In our use of annotations, the body is an RDF node that denotes some information about the target.

The annotation itself is a resource distinct from the target or body.  We use a "motivation" property applied to the annotation to indicate how the body is related to the target; e.g. a "Name attestation" motivation indicates that the body is information about a name atestation associated with a target place.  Generally, the expected structure of RDF information in the body depends on the motivation used (but note that the RDF's open world model allows providion of additional arbitrary information here).

Additional properties of the annotation can be used to provide additional context for the information provided.  Some commonly-used additional context values are:

- a time period in which the information is considered to be applicable
- an indication of the source or provenance of the information, which may in turn inform decisions about its trustworthiness
- an indication of the "competence" of the information provided; e.g. is it considered to be definitive (coming from a generally reliable source), inferred (deduced from other information), uncertain (a researchers informed guess), etc.
- bibliographic references that provide additional related information

## `em:hasAnnotation` Annotation 

This statement indicates an annotation associated with a place.  The annotation may carry different information about the place, dependent on the value of the associated Annotation type.

`em:hasAnnotation` functions roughly as an inverse of `oa:hastarget`, and is defined to simplify JSON-LD representations of annotations associated with a place.  The annotation itself should also have an `oa:hasTarget` property with the asscoated place as its object, to be a valid web annoation.

### `oa:hasTarget` Place

Connection from an annotation back to the associated place.

See also `em:hasAnnotation` Annotation.

### `oa:motivatedBy` Annotation type

The purpose of the annotation type is to make it easy to find particiular annotation values associated with a place.

### `oa:hasBody` Annotation body

The Annotation body conveys specific information associated with the associated place.  The expected structure of this information is defined by the corresponding Annotation type value.

@@TODO: should the annotation carry an editorial note: currently, that is attached to the annotation body.
-- I'm inclined to move it to the Annotation.  But check this doesn't violate OA.
-- OA allows multiple bodies per annotation.  Suggest the editorial note is provided as a separate body with textual value.

@@TODO: the above questions arise in part from thinking about the "annotation" as being a reification of an association between the place and the annotation body, thereby allowing that association to be qualified in various ways.

@@TODO: the above questions also beg the question: "why annoations?".  A possible answer is that they provide a seamless way to incorporate 3rd-party data, externally stored and managed, into an overall description.  This could support a number of potential usage models for EWMPlaces and friends (researcher notebooks, 3rd party submissions for incorporaton, use-dependent trust models fopr annotation data, etc.)

## `em:when` Timespan

Temporal qualification of association described by the annotation.

@@TODO: is this OK applied to the annotation, or should it be the annotation body?

### `em:source` Source

Indicates the source of information for the claim represented by this annotation.


# Specific Annotation details

## Name attestation

@@@TODO

## Calendar in use

Annotation type: `em:CalendarInUse`

### Calendar label

A short string or phrase used as a label for the calendar; e.g., "Julian", "Gregorian", etc.

### `em:uri` Calendar resource

@@TODO: `em:uri` is probably a poor name (implies mention rather than use).  Maybe `em:resource`?  Or `rdf:value`?  Or ...?

An arbitrary resource identifying and describing the calendar.  May be content negotiated to retrieve different formats.  Ideally, content negotion can provide a linked data representation, but this may not always be possible.  At least, the URI of this resource should be a way of uniquely identifying the calendar concerned.

### `rdfs:comment` Description

A textual description of the calendar's applicability to the associated place.

NOTE: the calendar itself may be described by a textual description associated with the calendar resource.  Where the same calendar is in use at several different places and/or times, it should be described just once.

### `em:when` Timespan

Indicates a period during which the calendar was used at the associated place.


## Map reference

@@@TODO

## Canonical URI

@@@TODO

## Linkback

A linkback annotation records a reference to the associated place from some external or separate published data.  For example, if a third party has published some additional data about an EMPlaces place, it may share a reference to that additional data via a published linkback annotation.

The data model does not constrain how a linkback is published; e.g., it may be part of the EMPlaces data, or the additional data service, or via some third-party annotation store.

@@@TODO



# Properties

@@TODO?
